# Deltakit Release Procedure

A new version of Deltakit is released on a regular basis. Only stable releases are currently supported.

## Stable Releases

Stable releases are performed whenever new features are implemented or bug fixes are made.
The target audience of stable releases is typical users.
Semantic versioning communicates whether releases include any backward compatible changes so that users can
decide when/whether to upgrade.

A stable release currently consists of:
- a version [tag](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging) (human-readable label) associated with a commit,
- assets published to PyPI (which gets added to the "Release history" there), and
- assets published to "Releases" on our GitHub repo.
- documentation, currently published using GitHub pages.

"Assets" currently refers to [wheel](https://peps.python.org/pep-0427/)s (pre-built Python package format)
and sdists ("source distribution") of `deltakit` and all component libraries.

A release is accompanied by release notes. Draft release notes are automatically compiled by [Python
Semantic Release](https://python-semantic-release.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) from the commit messages,
and these are manually reviewed and edited before publication.

To perform a release, the release manager needs to go through the following steps:

1. Create release notes. On `main`:

  1. Sync the `release` group:

  ```sh
  uv sync --python 3.13 --group release
  ```

  2. Update release notes in`CHANGELOG.md`:

  ```sh
  uv run --no-sync semantic-release -vv version --no-push --no-commit --no-tag
  ```

  3. Increment the version number in all subpackages `pyproject.toml` files:

  ```sh
  uv run --no-sync python tools/propagate_version.py
  ```

  4. Update the packages depending on a `deltakit-*` subpackage to the new version (e.g.,
  `deltakit-explorer` depends on `deltakit-core`, `deltakit-circuit` and `deltakit-decode`
  and these dependencies should reflect the new `deltakit` version).

  5. Generate a `licenses.confluence` file:

  ```sh
  uv run --no-sync pip-licenses --format=confluence  --output-file licenses.confluence
  ```

  Hand-edit it if necessary, and check that the `deltakit-*` subpackages versions changed
  to the released version.

2. Create a release branch with naming format `release/v<version number>`. On that branch, commit the previous changes and open a PR targeting `main`. The PR undertakes the review/approval process. Before merge, any final changes merged to `main` during the review process can be added by editing draft notes  auto-generated by semantic release (step 1.).

3. Update the version tag. After merge, the release manager checks out the commit to be released (typically the latest `main` after the release note PR merges), creates a tag (e.g. `git tag v0.4.0`), and pushes the tag to GitHub (`git push origin v0.4.0`).

4. Trigger the stable release workflow. On the tagged commit (i.e., click on "Run workflow", and pick an entry in the "Tags" tab when selecting a value for "Use workflow from"), trigger the "Build, test, and publish stable wheels" on GitHub Actions [here](https://github.com/Deltakit/deltakit/actions/workflows/release.yml). It builds, tests and publishes the artefacts to PyPI and GitHub, and it renders and uploads the documentation to GitHub pages.

The latest stable version of `deltakit` can be installed with `pip install deltakit`.